Have you ever sustained a shock in your life
from which you feel you never fully recovered?
Perhaps a car accident,
the death of a friend or a pet,
or a serious injury.
Jill Kuykendall's life work is helping people recover
those lost parts of themselves
with an ancient practice called soul retrieval.
In her former career, she was a physical therapist
who worked with the most fragile of us,
people getting out of bed for the first time
after surgery or an accident.
One day her life changed when she began seeing
another force surrounding them.
Today she facilitates one beautiful reunion after another.
Let's start at the beginning of your discovery
of the whole soul retrieval process,
going back to the times when you were a physical therapist.
What is the chronology of events that occurred
that brought you to where you are now?
I sometimes describe that as walking backwards
through the back door of this work
in that I was very busy.
I was working full time as an
in hospital physical therapist,
so I was working with a lot of people
in critical care situations,
and being that it was very scientific
and I was responsible for a lot
of data feedback on how patients are,
I wasn't really thinking about these things,
and yet long ago during an internship in physical therapy,
I was lucky enough to work with a European therapist
who oriented me towards understanding the
more personal or trans-personal aspects
of a person as they're recovering,
and it led me enough to understand
that the state of the soul is often revealed
by the breath and by their ability
to experience joy and happiness even during trying times,
so she really bridged me into knowing
that that's something I should take with me wherever I work,
so I'm working in a hospital, ICUs.
Intensive Care Units were places I spent a lot of time,
as well as being called upon by medical staff
to come and help somebody get out of bed for the first time
after a major surgery or being in bed in a prolonged way,
or even after a major accident.
That's why people are in the hospital.
And getting out of bed is something I take for granted,
and yet in that moment in which you really can't do it,
it is helpful to have somebody there
who will deal with IV lines and oxygen
and all of these things that make it more nerve-racking.
So I would be called in as one of many therapists
to assist this person to come to the edge of the bed,
stand up, get their bearings, take a few steps,
and then generally stay up in a chair
for maybe just fifteen minutes.
This is how you get started.
Getting out of that bed is your way of going home.
I would walk in and had very little time.
I had 22 minutes to review a chart,
talk to a nurse, get in, establish trust,
set the situation up, assist the patient, get it done,
and then basically get back to that chart and chart it,
and then I'm on to the next patient.
22 minutes?
22 minutes.
Seven minutes to accomplish the first part,
15 to get them to set up, and then one minute
to chart it, and out you go.
Right.
Wow.
Yeah.
The whole time, establishing real genuine trust
in connection with this person.
That was the first seven minutes.
(both laugh)
I would find that I would walk in,
and my natural tendency was
to basically honor them
and introduce myself and call them by name
and let them know that they're in the middle of this event
and yet the doctor has declared it time
for them to get out of bed and start moving,
and many of them, the bed had become the safe zone.
This is asking a lot of them, to leave the safe zone.
Said, "We're gonna take it one step at a time,
"and any time you need to break it up,
"we'll break it up, and we'll only go
"as far as you can and what you say."
I started to emphasize "what you're ready for".
"We'll do what you're truly ready for,
"but we don't even know what that is until we try."
There were times where it was very slow,
just rolling to the side,
getting them to sit up on the side of the bed,
and that's usually a time when things
like blood pressure will woo, take a dive.
So I always knew to have them stop there
while everything came back,
and I could see all the monitors.
I could see that heart rate, blood pressure,
oxygen saturation, everything had to maintain
in order to take the next step.
Here they are sitting on the side of the bed.
Sometimes I'd be standing next to them with a hand on them.
Sometimes they'd have me sit next to them,
give them a little more support,
and I've done this, you know, day after day for years,
and all of a sudden, that one particular day,
I see something going on in the room.
It's like hot air above asphalt, you know.
I mean, it was like, "What?"
I'm thinking the lights, something in the hallway.
Like that wavy kind of pattern?
That wavy thing.
Yeah.
But it was more subtle than the intense heat off asphalt,
so I'm looking in the hall to see
if something's reflecting out,
and I then assume that it's me.
Burn out is happening right before ... (both laugh)
Hallucinations!
Yeah.
And yet I noticed that it started to shift and change
and coalesce around this individual
and then literally merge with him,
and this just took my breath away
except I was in the middle of being of service to somebody,
so I thought, "This is not the time for me
"to try and figure this out."
And you know, inevitably, within a minute or two
of this person saying, "I'm too anxious. I can't do this."
You know, "I'm not ready."
There would be this deep sigh,
and they'd say, "You know, I think I can do this."
Hm.
That's how it began, and what I was seeing,
without even trying to develop this ability,
was I was seeing an aspect of this person's life essence
that had separated from them but had not dissociated.
It had stayed relatively close,
and given the right opportunity
to make a very life-affirming gesture,
from going from the horizontal to the vertical
in a way in which they're being honored,
encouraged to be more powerful,
there's a little harmony being restored there.
It came back to them, as it should.
It's not meant to be missing.
It's an adaptive mechanism
when a portion of our life essence leaves
in order to narrow us down so we can simply cope,
and in some cases, survive.
Hospitals are a pretty intense environment,
and we go through a lot of experiences there
that are challenging to our life essence,
so I had no clue though, when I first saw this,
and then I started to see it with other people,
and as I would use my own time
to call up friends who did energy work,
I'd say, "This is what I'm observing.
"What do you think it is?"
They were somewhat descriptive,
but it wasn't until my husband Hank Wesselman walks
by as I'm on the phone,
overhears a bit of what I'm talking about,
and then indicates to me
that he thinks he knows what's going on.
As an anthropologist and someone
who's done some shamanic work training,
he said, "I think you are facilitating a kind
"of spontaneous return of this life essence,
"and it's now referred to as soul retrieval."
And I thought, "My goodness."
This goes right back to my original understanding,
side by side with medicine from this European therapist
who said, "The soul's reality will always be showing
"up when you work with people."
Mm-hmm.
So I said, "Let's see what this means."
I got into some of the literature,
ethnographic literature as well as
some of the things that had been written
like Sandra Ingerman's book on soul retrieval,
and I said, "Well, my goodness.
"I know how to shamanicly journey.
"Maybe those situations where the readiness is there
"but the dissociation has occurred,
"maybe I can use my journey skills
"to go and connect with aspects
"of a person's life essence and bridge it back."
So it started very slowly.
It was about six months of observation in the hospital,
some conversation, reading about it,
learning more about it,
and I would say within a year's period of time,
I had shifted enough to turn to a few friends
and say, "You know, I can journey on your behalf
"to see if I can help you with something
"that you've been missing."
They all were very happy for me to do that,
and I figured, "Well, that was interesting.
"Now what else can I pay attention to?"
Well then they started sharing,
and phone calls started to come in
of people I had never even met.
"Would you be willing to journey on my behalf?"
And I thought, "Well, okay."
I figured, "How long could this last?
"Maybe six months?"
By then I had moved into my own consulting work
in terms of independent living,
especially for elders in the Sacramento area,
and before I knew it there were more calls
for me to do soul retrieval journeys
than there was to do home visits and so forth,
and I stepped back and I said,
"20 years of working in rehab has taught me so much,
"and it's brought me to this point.
"What do I do?"
And my own inner guidance and my own journey work
to discover what I am being led into said,
"Let go of the rehab. Open yourself to this."
And as long as people ask, I'll be of service.
It's such a beautiful
and really organic story
of your beginnings,
Yeah. (laughs)
and how wonderful that Hank was there
to basically guide you and say,
"Hey, this is what's going on."
to refine your process.
Let's get into it now.
Now, so this is what you do,
and you help people guide portions of their soul
back to themselves.
Right.
Let's talk about how we
become disassociated from pieces or portions
of the soul force to begin with.
Yeah, well, I'll define this life essence or the soul
in just very pragmatic terms.
I do not create, first, a religious overlay about it,
but it's the energetic portion of you
that's very much oriented towards your wellness
and being alive, and yet it has a certain imprint
on it that's specific to you,
and it has to do with your own personal,
supernatural nature that's imbuing this life force.
In other words, there's one very specific to you,
very specific to me, and mine can only serve me.
It can't really serve you.
So when I talk about a person's life essence,
I'm talking about that energetic field
that's really their thumbprint,
and when they have experiences
which are in any way considered traumatic and overwhelming,
whether it's outwardly evident,
or maybe it's an inward process
where it's their own perceptual experience
that something traumatic is happening
although nobody else would perceive it in the moment,
you can in fact precipitate your own soul loss
because now you have something you need to cope with,
based on your own perceptions.
And a part of that essence,
which is really oriented to being connected,
will step out.
It will actually achieve a separate state
to bring you down into a narrowed place in order to cope.
This is a good thing. This is an adaptive mechanism.
It's kind of like the body kicking in
only the survival mechanisms.
It is.
Mmhmm.
Just like if you were to cut yourself,
you have a clotting factor.
Right, and all your energy goes there.
Yeah, this is an adaptive mecha-, so it's ...
When people go, "Soul loss is terrible."
I go, "No, it's not." (laughs)
It's an adaptation to help, yeah.
Ultimately, it's not, but we've just unfortunately,
are dealing with times in which it no longer stays close.
What I'm talking about is the rhythm is that it leaves
and it narrows you down to cope
with the idea that the rhythm is the trauma has passed.
Now it's time to return to a more harmonious state.
You're going to, you know,
and I'm thinking of an example of somebody
who had soul loss as a child that was a combination
of falling off the top of a jungle gym,
hitting the ground just as the school,
the recess bell rang, and air knocked out,
all the kids are running away,
and unable to move, get up, scream, or anything.
Oh, wow, a convergence of a lot
of events in one moment.
Exactly.
In this child's mind, they thought they were dying,
and nobody was going to help them.
A few minutes later the teacher did come
and assist getting the child back in the classroom
and was sensitive enough to say,
"I know where a nice, quiet place would be for you
"just to kind of gather yourself."
And set up a little chair in the little coat collection area
where all the lunch boxes, (both laugh)
and let that child collect herself
and then at her own pace come back
to her desk and join in,
and at the end of the day,
went home, surrounded herself with her precious things,
you know, her stuffed animals,
maintained kind of a quiet day.
The mother was informed of what had happened
and everything seemed to be fine physically.
Then of course went to sleep that night,
and throughout the rest of the day,
there were these little touches
in which there was a re-harmonizing that went on.
Whatever she needed to do to restore herself,
and then of course the sleeping at night is a time
in which there's a lot of body restoration,
and as I understand, there's a lot of soul return,
based on those soul parts that haven't left.
Now too often, we have experiences
in which we just have to keep going
and things are not re-harmonized.
Maybe that what precipitated the soul loss
is a chronic thing.
Right.
And that soul part cannot get back.
It cannot get back.
It cannot because of the agitated state,
or the shift in the energetic state of that life essence,
and so it dissociates.
Now this is where I ask my psychology friends,
"Where does it dissociate?"
And it's not within their field to operate
with that kind of consideration.
Sure.
But when you go back into the ethnographic literature,
you'll realize that consistently around the world,
the shamans that were the healers
for tribes and groups of people actually did understand
that there is this other level of reality
that they simply slip into
that's outside our time and space,
and it has it's own cosmological, geographical locations,
which again are consistently agreed upon,
and these soul parts,
these pieces of a person's life essence,
will actually end up in one of these locations.
I wanted to ask a couple questions
at this point, before we go further.
How does, you're talking about the unique thumbprint
that is us energetically that surrounds the body.
How does this differ from, or does it differ from,
the more extended view of the auric field?
Well, I'm not sure that I know
what the extended view of the auric field is. (laughs)
Well, I mean all the subtle bodies.
For example, all the subtle bodies
that would constitute one's individual auric field,
with all of the carried forward information
that lies in our unique thumbprint.
Right. I guess I should really call it a breath-print.
Okay.
Because it's the part of the soul,
the immortal part of our soul that really seeds itself
when we take in our first breath when we're born.
Okay, okay.
However that translates then into the aura,
or the developing aura, somebody else can speak about that,
but there is an aspect of our soul that's immortal,
and through my own observations,
and then again going back into the literature,
low and behold,
it seems as if the indigenous people have understood
for a long time that our soul is not a singularity.
It's actually a composite, to keep it simple,
of three souls that comes together
to constitute the entirety of the soul.
One of those souls is our immortal soul,
the other two are generated through the mortal life
that we're living at this time,
and so it's that seeding of the immortal soul
that creates that breath-print
into your energetic field that,
in other words, creates your Regina-ness.
Mmhmm. (laughs)
My Jill-ness. (laughs)
Jill-ness, right.
So in that sense, we can claim it.
As part of our birthright, we can claim that
as part of who we are.
Mmhmm, okay.
Is this something that most people experience
within their lifetime, and give us some of the ways
in which this is inspired from childbirth forward.
Okay, yes, in fact, I think it is part of being human
that we have this experience
such that it is an adaptive mechanism.
It's part of our survival,
and in the past,
in tribal societies it was very common for the wellbeing
of the group to be benefitted by making sure
that people were soulfully intact
and if they had soul loss,
there was definitely something done
at the level of community ceremony
within three days of the soul loss.
Now I hear that given our Western society way of being
in the world, which we tend to have great wounding
from birth on, or even before birth
such that, well, we're always trying
to work that out in therapy many, many years later.
Sometimes it is a matter of just simply allowing the reunion
of the life essence to come back
and then live at that level.
Easier said than done?
Easier said than done, except in children.
Right. (Jill laughs)
Right, they instinctively know
Right.
when it's time to take a little break
That's right.
and time to party.
Exactly.
Mmhmm.
Now for others, I will say that,
I would say the better percentage,
I don't know the numbers.
I don't sit at outside cafes watching people go by
and going, "Oh my goodness. Oh you better come over here."
I mean, this is not what I do. (both laugh)
Right.
You know, the standard by which I do
this work is based upon people asking,
so in terms of the people that come to me,
it's 100%. (laughs)
Sure. (laughs)
But I will say that most people who say,
"You do an interesting work, I hear.
"What is it that you do?"
I have have found it's very beneficial
to respond by asking questions,
by drawing people into their own reflection.
I'll say, "Have you ever had an experience
"in which you feel as if you lost a part of yourself
"and you weren't the same afterwards?"
It can be a death in the family.
It can be a car accident.
It can be the death of a pet.
I was just going to say
or the death of your little dog or cat.
I experienced that with the death
of a pet recently.
I haven't felt quite the same.
Haven't felt quite the same.
Mmhmm.
Immediately people go, "Oh, yeah."
Then I'll say, "Did you ever think you
"could get that part of yourself back?"
And the consistency of,
"Really? That's possible?"
And I'll go, "That's what I do."
Rather than trying to explain it in a way
that's intellectually satisfying for people
with Western-shaped minds,
this is actually a healing technique.
It's one of the oldest that was based
upon a very indigenous-shaped mind and heart,
and so doing this work is sometimes going beyond
what we can mentally comprehend.
I think back to when I was in medical school.
The closest we got to describing anything
that sounded similar to person dealing
with soul loss is they've lost the will to live.
Right.
That's about it, and in terms of failure to thrive,
we do have medical codes for infants and elders
because there are physiological indicators
of failure to thrive for those age brackets,
but what about the rest of us?
So there's a large percentage of the population
that I would say definitely,
and there's certain patterns of loss
that you do this work long enough you go, "Aha".
This is part of what
our society is consistently dealing with.
Let's talk about that.
Let's talk about patterns of loss.
Let's start with the most vulnerable situation,
a baby that appears to be physically normal
but somehow there's not the will to survive
and may end up dying through SIDS
or something very early on.
Have you seen anything regarding this subject?
For example, about a newly incarnated soul
into a baby's body?
Yeah.
It can, just in putting out the possibilities,
it can be that that child had a kind of contract
in which they weren't meant to live very long anyway.
Let me just put that out there.
It's important to honor a life's contract,
no matter how long a child lives,
even if it's a miscarriage.
I have had personal experience of that
in which I've benefitted a great deal
at my own level of healing and recovery of a soul part
as a result of a miscarriage
by meeting with the spirit of that baby,
in which the baby said, "I wasn't meant to be born.
"I was just meant to have a certain energetic association
I'm getting chills.
"and then go back out again."
Mmhmm.
So I want to order every life contract.
At the same time, it is possible that soul loss occurred
during the pregnancy for this child.
Soul loss may have occurred during the birth,
and it certainly can occur any time after birth
in that first year,
which is still a kind of mortality issue period,
and there's stages in which incarnation is occurring,
and the birth soul loss is very classic
in terms of a core loss.
As we know, there's a history of the challenge
of the hospital environment and birthing rights,
and birthing centers have increased over the last 25 years.
There are also issues of the nature
of the dynamic within the family,
the psychological reality of the parents,
the economic reality.
There are all these things that are in the air
or in the mood or in the emotions,
especially of the mother, that can be felt by the child,
who doesn't have the kind of filtering system
that you develop once you are here
and living the life in a body,
so there are perceptual challenges.
There may even be metabolic challenges
that create soul loss, all for the sake
that the child will experience that soul loss
in order to be born, and in order to remain alive.
In that one sense, it's serving a very important purpose,
and yet, to lose a core soul part at the time of birth
or before or following, this is important
that this reunion be facilitated.
There is a lot of that influence
of that loss that will
in fact predict or possibly set
up a continuing loss pattern
later on in life, and this is
where it's not just the individual loss incidences,
but you start to see a pattern in a person's life
in which there is a sequence of losses based
upon that pattern showing up again.
Don't we also choose our relationships
in a sense to reflect that which we're either looking for
or have lost?
Sure.
Can you talk about that a bit
and how you've seen this play itself out?
I have.
I've seen individuals come in with almost the same script,
and being born into a family
in which my childhood didn't last very long
because I had to take care of the parents.
I had to raise them rather than they raising me.
There's also the soul loss that will occur
in which there is oftentimes some kind
of inadequate bonding with a parent,
maybe even the gender of the baby is not acceptable
to one of the parents, and then that same sex parent,
as it shows up in other relationships,
will have an impact and trigger other kinds of losses
based upon the same kind of attitude.
Say a woman born a girl not a boy.
The father objects. He's been expecting a boy.
There's vast disappointment there.
He kind of backs off.
He's hand's off, doesn't know what to do with a little girl.
You can see that then with teachers
and employers and boyfriends.
It keeps showing up, the same cycle.
It keeps showing up in which it just,
the pattern cycles into these relationships,
and it may be that the soul loss occurred
because her male boss fired her,
and yet when the journey occurs,
we discover there was something
that occurred at her birth,
and what can you do as a newborn about your gender?
Nothing, so a part of you will leave
in order to survive that situation
that's going on around you, that's being projected at you
or not made available to you in a bonding way.
It is interesting when you do go and look back
at the patterns in a person's life
and realize, "Aha, I see. It actually began here
and not just when the employment issue showed up."
Can you give us a couple more examples?
Just everybody loves to hear stories
so we can relate to ourselves,
and that have been particularly profound to you.
Yes, I've done over 3, 000 soul retrievals,
and I do keep case studies on each one,
and the way in which it unfolds,
it allows me to stay connected to the story,
and yet, there is a process at the end of the session
in which I'm literally lifted out of the direct experience,
and I'm not afforded a lot of recall of all the details.
I understand.
And that creates confidentiality for the person,
but I have had some extraordinary incidents.
Just to give a little of a preliminary of this is
that I was approached by a mother
and her 19 year old daughter,
and she was a single mom, had raised this girl.
They were very close.
Their closeness was now getting in the way
of the daughter moving on and being her own person,
and they felt as if there was some soul loss
that had gone on during their troubled past,
and as well as the absence of the father
and emotional neediness,
and they really wanted to both experience retrieval.
Those session occurred,
and they're very happy with where they proceeded,
but I want to tell you something interesting
that occurred in the preliminary phase
because I just don't stop, drop,
and go and get a soul part.
I actually first shift and make connection
with the local nature spirits,
and there are many more of them
than they are manifested,
although we live in this extraordinary place being
that it has, well, it's the second largest urban forrest
on the planet.
Yes.
I'm lucky in that I draw upon the tree spirits
and the plant and animal spirits, and along with that,
there is a small cluster of Native American spirits
that come up from a creek area not far from my office
when they hear the drumming begin,
and they contribute by making a circle
around me and the person,
walls and asphalt have disappeared in my visionary state.
They look to enhance, in a preliminary way,
just the setting in which I'm doing this work,
the sacredness of this, the enhanced sense of support,
and they will in fact focus their energy on the person,
and extend to them sometimes either a prayer
or a chant or a gift, and all of this is the protocol
that leads then into doing the retrieval.
When the young woman came, the daughter came,
and we had our chance to share,
I'm at this point in the journey,
the preliminary phase when the Native Americans come,
and they bring a one person canoe,
and they put it right next to her.
Immediately I think, "Ah, this is the invitation
"for her to get in her own canoe."
"Symbolic as it is now, and begin her own journey."
But they weren't done.
They started filling the canoe with yams. (Regina laughs)
Now, this is very typical of seeing something
in a journey in which it's very symbolic.
You don't know what it means,
and so you just allow your observation to hold onto it.
When the canoe was fully filled,
they stopped and they maintained their composure,
and I went right into the journey.
What I shared with her about the journey afterwards,
I said, " Let me start with how it began."
And I told her about the canoe and the yams.
I said, "Boy, I don't know what that's about.
"I sure hope you like yams." and she started to cry.
I said, "You don't like yams?" (both laugh)
She said, "You would not have known this,
"but when my mother and I are in public
"and we're either saying goodbye to each other
"or we're greeting each other, we say, 'yams'."
I said, "You do?"
She said, "Yes. It stands for you are my sunshine."
Aw.
This is to indicate to you that the work
that's done is in response to the person
and not necessarily something that I pull out.
Sorry.
We're back to our ... (laughs)
We're gonna have to ...
That sounds like a British breakfast. (all laugh)
The nightmare of every editor. (Jill laughs)
"Oh, it's okay. We can fix it in post.
"Oh god, I can't believe she said that." (laughs)
I did an interview at the Santa Fe conference
very much like this, and it was just about,
you know, quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet, quiet,
and they started, and one of the crew's cellphone went off.
Oh, that's the worst, when you do it to yourself.
Okay, well, while it's quiet, let's go ahead and pick it up.
Can you give us an idea of a couple
of the more profound experiences you've had with clients?
Yes, and there's a wide variety to draw from,
including aspects of the journey experience
that are part of the protocol
before even getting into the retrieval part.
It's important to know that things are done
with stage dependency, if you will,
and my spirits are very gracious and supportive of me,
and yet they do ask that I take the time
to first connect with the local nature spirits
that are around me in the area in which I do this work,
and I'm blessed to be in the Sacramento Valley area doing it
because we have such a plethora
of tree and plant and animal spirits.
It is the second largest urban forrest in the world,
second to Paris, and so even just looking out the window,
you can identify a lot of tress, but guess what,
there's a lot more tree spirits than there are manifested
when you call to them,
so it is a huge gathering of beautiful nature energy
which supplies the power to do this work,
and oftentimes there's a certain degree of something unique
in that demonstration where it could be a certain tree
or plant is featured or an aspect of the plants
or animals are featured.
There's also different times of day
than the time of day I'm doing the journey,
a different weather condition,
even a different season.
All of these things are asking me to notice.
"Be observant, Jill."
Which I do, and I'm more than glad to relay any
of the uniqueness of the setting
once I'm sharing the journey outcome.
This one particular journey I did
for a mother and a daughter
actually it was gonna be two separate journeys to help them
in the individualization process of the daughter.
They were so close,
having been a single mom and just the two of them,
it was very hard for her now to make choices
about creating a life for herself.
So having looked back on a lot of the hardship,
the emotional challenges, they knew that part
of their healing would be for both
of them to have soul retrieval.
When the daughter came to me
and I stepped into the journey,
I called to the nature spirits and they came,
and they were immediately supportive
of all that we were doing, and then I also noticed
that a group of Native American spirits that reside,
I don't wanna say haunt, but they reside in the dream aspect
of a creek area that's just a few blocks from my office,
and they come and create a very supportive circle
around us as well.
Now when they came for this young woman,
they brought a one person canoe,
and in my mind's eye, it was like, "How symbolic."
Again, this is all done in the visionary state,
and this is the realm of symbol and imagery and metaphor.
This is not about psyching this out,
so I'm willing to look at any of the visuals
that they're giving me as pure symbolism,
and they brought this one person canoe.
Quite symbolic of a person going off on their own adventure,
going off to establish their own life,
and yet what surprised me was they began
to put into the canoe yams, and at first I thought,
"This is odd, but here they go."
And they continued to fill this canoe
with yams right up to the top,
maybe room for her, but it was just mounded with yams,
and still no clear understanding on my part,
but my job in dong this work is to be very clear
about what I'm observing so that I can articulate it
and language it appropriately,
and as I finished the journey
and completed the soul retrieval,
I started to share about the local nature spirits
and the Native Americans and the fact they brought her
this canoe and yet, what's with the yams?
I even said, "I hope you like yams
"because it looks as if you got a lot of them."
And when I indicated to her that
that was very specifically pointed out to me
that these were yams, she started to cry
because there was a code between she and her mother.
When they were in public and they wanted
to express great affection for each other
without embarrassing each other,
whether they were meeting or parting,
they would use the code word "YAMS",
and it stands for you are my sunshine.
Aw, aw.
Now, I didn't know this.
It's a pure gift on the part of the spirits
to let her know that in any effort to individuate
and move into her own life that she's going with plenty
of you are my sunshine from mom. (both laugh)
The connection's still there.
It's still there in heaps,
and I mention this because it is important
in doing this work that you honor the great truth
that's coming for the benefit of this individual
and not necessarily something
that I'm trying to make happen.
Mmhmm.
My willingness to speak about these things
that I don't fully understand is part of the magic
because it creates a validation moment for that person.
And it takes courage on your part to say,
"Well, you know, the canoe's full of yams."
Yes.
And feel foolish not knowing what
this is about at times too.
I have often said to people,
"My language is going to get a little flowery.
"It's gonna be like I'm reporting from your fairytale."
(both laugh)
I'll give them a little warning
that it may start to sound like that,
and one of the ways in which I got comfortable languaging
these things was by reading fairytales out loud,
as I did to my children when they were little, and so
after while, you realize that the support is not gonna end
at what I'm seeing.
It's gonna continue so that I'm able to language
this experience in a way in which whatever needs
to truly be transferred is transferred in that way,
and I'm not trying to make it reasonable or understandable
in the way in which I'm talking about it.
How did it end with the girl and her mother?
How did they ...
They both were very honoring
of the soul parts they got back.
They had actually swapped soul parts.
The mother had a soul part of her daughter.
The daughter had a soul part of her mother,
and they did a ritual to return the soul part
to each other.
Yeah.
In doing so, it really does allow
for a more complete individuation
in which the girl's boundary and the mother's boundary
could even continue to mature,
and they could meet each other at the boundary
with still a heart-to-heart connection.
I don't think the girl moved far, far away,
but I mean, it was more than 10 miles from mom,
and in doing so, they were able to move their relationship
to a whole new plateau of knowing each other as women,
and continue to be of, I think,
great value to each other.
But it's a maturing up process.
I've often said, "You know, when you claim
"what's rightfully yours to claim,
"so much more is possible."
And when you maintain a sense of a mutual connection,
whether it's with your mother or your daughter,
or with the spirits that are here to serve us, you're
creating a real medium for magic to flow.
So calling yourself back, releasing what belongs to
somebody else, is actually of great service in bringing
a lot of promise as to what is possible.
Assuming not everybody can find somebody
like you, to have this private experience, although, we're
going to give your contact info so I hope you're ready
for a little bit of action there if you have time, how can
one facilitate this for themselves, or can they?
This has always been an important consideration
of mine, I tend to choose work, which really is about
eliminating my work.
So as I began to recognize the potential here, of
being of service, then I realized in yet really, the care
and the nurturing of our soul is our own primary
responsibility.
So first thing, is I let people know it's possible.
I let people know that there is this phenomenon of
soul loss and that you can, in fact, call yourself back.
It's easiest to do during the time that's more acute,
or in the earlier beginning phase of soul loss, before
things have had a chance to dissociate.
What I have experienced, and again, it's not about
never having soul loss again.
It's really accepting it as an adaptive mechanism
and noticing when I have it.
I encourage people who come to me, and groups
that I talk to, notice when you have it and validate
the fact that it's occurred, and such that even if there
is, like the sudden loss of a family member or a pet,
there is that odd feeling throughout the day as you're
having to deal and to talk with people, and cope
with your emotional swings, before you go to bed at night,
before you step into the dream world, call yourself back.
Interesting, I have a friend that does that
every morning upon awakening, as well.
Yes, and I would encourage that, too, because there
are times in which, sometimes we just want to stay
out in that dream world and not come all the way back in
as we awaken in the morning.
So this becomes part of personal, self care of the soul.
Makes total sense.
Absolutely, and again, I come from a physical rehab
background where it's really about being very practical,
keeping things ethical, and simple, and affording people
much more of their own personal empowerment.
Now, there is something called dissociation.
At first, I thought it is this disconnect in which these
soul parts really do leave this time, space, energetic
continuum, and they're outside of time.
Well, we just have to create that reconnection, and low
and behold, they'll come back.
But, I had somebody come to me, and then more than one
person said "Why aren't they looking for me"?
And I thought good question.
So I actually will meet with my heeling team, and
further these discussions by asking these questions.
Something that I learned, again, makes sense now,
is that not only are they disconnected, but they're
outside of time where there isn't a sense of the past,
and it's just that now.
So it isn't like needing to remember anything.
Or find it's way back.
Many soul parts are in a location in the spirit world,
in which they're getting exactly what they needed at
the time they left.
So if you're very young, in a disempowered time of
your life, and you really were in a situation where you
needed more power, more support, and probably
more protection.
There's a good reason to dissociate and go into
the lower world of dream, which is the great dreaming
of nature, and also the location where you're gonna
experience power, support, and protection.
Now, what helps is when you establish the reconnection
to the soul part, that soul part can begin to remember
it's source, that individual, and so if in fact,
there is not a practitioner that you wanna work with,
and there are reasons to work with a practitioner,
it's still possible, by first establishing a connection
between yourself and that soul part.
It does mean going into a sincere hurt, and
express that desire to reconnect with that soul part
that left, or all of your soul parts.
Doing so means that you've got to be very truthful,
contacting your inner source of wisdom and truth, and
have it support and express your need.
And it means taking a look at what's not working
in your life, big or small.
Also, look back over your life, what are the patterns
that don't serve you?
Sometimes you'll see it behaviorally, or in a relationship
style, or in your own mood, or attitude,
whatever it might be...
Or in physical issues.
Physical issues, and then understand that there may
be soul loss that corresponds to that, and look to
reconnect to those soul parts.
And in doing so, you're inviting a reversal of the
dissociation by first, by making the connection.
Now, we are not really meant to do everything alone.
So even if there's not a practitioner in your community,
you can begin to foster relationship with spirit helpers,
spirit guides, and call upon them to enter in such
a way that they assist in the soul part coming back.
Just knowing they can come back is a big step.
And the fact that you can be very proactive about this
is another big step, but you do have to establish a
certain degree of relationship, even if it's just with
the soul part cause what are relating to?
An aspect of yourself that hasn't been available
to you in a long time and it does require a certain
degree of extending yourself in order for it to be
reunited with you.
If this subject is of interest to you, you might
also enjoy the interview we did with Jill's husband,
Hank Wesselman, as a shaman and anthropologist,
he's experienced the world of spirit in all it's forms
and has a fascinating story to tell.
In Hank's second interview, we speak specifically
about soul retrieval.
Until next time, thanks for watching.